Balanced-Leadership-Teams.md

You’ve carved out your role as product manager, and now you’re feeling overwhelmed and under-appreciated? Struggling with decision fatigue? Unable to deliver what’s expected of you? Maybe the problem isn’t you. Maybe you need partners! A change in how the organization works could get you off the struggle bus and back to being the best product manager you can be. Read on to find out how.

## tl;dr
When presenting product plans to leaders, employees, and even externally, the plans are owned by a group of people, typically the functional leaders, rather than the product manager’s alone. That’s it, that’s the tweet.

> Long ago, a new Engineering Director was assigned to my team to relieve the current director who had too many responsibilities. A few weeks later, I went to edit the team’s quarterly review document, and I found my new peer had already started making changes. I was alarmed, this was my job, my doc! Why was he making changes? Did he not trust me, did he not appreciate the role of product manager? Didn’t he understand that he was going to make me look bad? “No,” he said, “You’ve been solo for too long. You’ve forgotten that you’re part of a team. You don’t need to do this on your own, you have help now. We are a team!” I will never forget the relief I felt on that day.

## Let’s get promoted together

How many times have you heard this phrase, “The product manager is the general manager (GM) or chief executive (CEO) of the product. It’s their vision, their responsibility. They make all the decisions and direct all activities. They do what it takes to make sure the product is successful.” I don’t feel this is a good description of the role of a product manager. For more, read [product-manager-identity.md][1] to review a more nuanced opinion of what a product manager does.

In truth, there’s never just one leader. There are many functional leaders in product development: design, development, testing, support. Each of them has a career path and a healthy ego. It’s important to respect that each will deliver their part. It’s less good to sit back and watch a peer fail. What if the functional leads teamed up to make decisions together, and together were held accountable for the outcomes of the product?

Balanced leadership teams formalizes what should be obvious. We succeed when we succeed together. The concept gives us permission to step out of our roles, and help each other in a respectful way, without infringing on each others’ swim lanes.

**How this is valuable to Product Managers**

The image from the Welcome blog post was designed by a VP of Product Development of an organization that I was part of. He recognized a common pattern in which product managers had established themselves as a valuable resource, only to find that it’s human nature for people to get a little spoiled.

It’s common for the PM to get overwhelmed. Years ago, I remember a PM venting, “They want me to make every decision! How big the button should be. How far from the left margin the button should be placed. What color the button should be. How should I know? These people are accomplished web developers, they should use their best judgement!” Years later, trying to stay true to my product manager identity, I coped by asking my team to help do research and form suggestions, “There’s only one of me, and several of you. If you depend on me to write all the stories, it’s inevitable that I’ll hold you back. And I’d like to be able to take a vacation.” This helped, but I was still expected to make most of the decisions. I’d come back to a stack of thoughtfully written documents that took time to read, reflect, and decide on.

Versions of this were happening to most of the PMs across our organization.

To resolve this issue, our VP introduced the concept of the “balanced leadership team,” and I’ve seen variations of the concept work well since. A PM’s job is to influence what’s most important to work on. When the team decides to work on it, responsibility shifts from the PM to the leadership team. Ideally, the PM doesn’t walk away after something goes into development, they remain involved. Transitioning from idea to development introduces additional voices, typically the product engineering lead(s), perhaps a product designer, sometimes program management. A balanced leadership team makes decisions about product development together. This moves the psychological pressure of decision making from an individual to a group. If I make a decision, and it’s wrong, that’s going to trouble me. Worse, perhaps others will blame me, and tell their boss that I’m doing a bad job. If we make a decision together, then we support each other. Additionally, balanced leadership teams scale, because each can make suggestions and gather data from qualified resources that best suit their experience. Perhaps most importantly, balanced leadership teams relieve the product manager from making 100% of the decisions, allowing them time to do what they do best: continually review and get feedback from potential users and stakeholders to validate if the product is headed in the right direction.

How it works: before introducing the next iteration of work to the team, the balanced leadership team meets and reviews the potential work together. Each member lobbies the team for what they feel should be included in the scope, and together, they review the stories to ensure that they’re actionable for the engineers. This is typical agile, but the point of working together is that, exiting that pre-planning meeting, the team has decided on the backlog together. When presenting to the team, it’s not PM vs. everyone, all of the team leads have given their input. The team is more ready to accept the work, because their leaders have already had a chance to express the needs of the team. There’s still more planning to do, but hopefully any big objections or concerns will have already been addressed by pre-planning.

There’s another benefit to the balanced leadership team. As the team works together, they evolve their shared understanding of the product’s trajectory over the longer term. During larger planning cycles, the PM doesn’t stand alone before leadership, the team presents together. This lends credibility to the product manager - rather than a single person making wild claims, leadership sees that the plan has already been sanity checked, and by acting as a team, the members have some stake in the outcome. Product engineering and design are no longer passive participants, “I could have told you it was stupid, but the PM sets the priority.” Committing to the shared goals of the team to leadership means that each leader will be held accountable if something goes wrong. Changing the dynamic dramatically reduces finger-pointing. Acting as a team moves us away from, “engineering didn’t deliver,” or “the PM chose the wrong user group,” to, “we’ll deliver to our commitments together.”

Moving to balanced leadership teams needs cultural support. If I commit as a PM to sitting with my engineering lead every day, and helping them when there’s a struggle to deliver, but my management doesn’t reward that behavior, or if the engineering lead doesn’t accept “product manager meddling,” then it all falls apart.

At least two things are required, then, for this to work: 1. the commitment from each individual to respect one another’s contributions, and to work together as a team. 2. for each member to be mindful of their background and skills, and to trust each other in turn. For the PM, this means being super mindful not to cross a line. Saying, “we can’t write this software in Rust because I believe Ruby on Rails is going to give us better flexibility over time and better product velocity,” is a lot different than saying, “I’m really worried that delivering a Rust application to users will cause unusual support burdens because the diagnostic tooling is pretty unique. Let’s show the debugging workflows to the Support leads, and consider their feedback?”

Finally, balanced leadership teams foster a healthy culture of escalation. Often, we are wary to ‘tattle’ on each other. “I think Marco’s mistaken about this feature. But he seems so determined, and it’s his responsibility to make that choice. So I will be passive, and if he fails, then leadership will sort him out.” As a member of the team, though, the thought becomes, “Marco and I can’t agree. We both feel strongly, and are struggling to disagree and commit. I’ll suggest we raise the issue to our respective managers. Perhaps they can share wisdom or otherwise mediate the stalemate.” To me, this feels much better than tattling - we agree to raise the issue to our respective managers together. If this happens too often, management can also gain insight that perhaps something is wrong. Maybe Marco is crossing the line by dictating implementation, or engineering is too risk-averse because they’re afraid of the support burden. Maybe there are fundamental differences about the purpose of the product, and those diverging assumptions are causing friction. Whatever it is, the sooner it’s made evident in a calm, respectful way, the sooner managers can make adjustments. This could range from simple coaching to switching up the team to find a better combination of stakeholders.

Ultimately, I think balanced leadership teams are what management imagines is happening all along - it’s just that we rarely acknowledge this as fundamental to our culture. Management expects us to share our ideas. Management expects us to work as a team. Management expects us to disagree and commit, and when we can’t, they want to know as soon as possible. Without explicitly acknowledging that decisions are made by a team, not individuals, it’s natural that we will default to each person succeeding or failing in their role. It takes deliberate effort to work together, and by doing so, gain empathy and respect for each others’ cotributions.


[1]:	product-manager-identity.md "Product Manager Identity"