Product Management Identity

Few roles are as misunderstood as Product Management. Most people know how Developers and Sales people are recognized. But what does a Product Manager do? This is such a fundamental question there are several children’s books on the subject!

Is a PM a project manager? Partially. Is the PM a sales person? Sometimes! Is a PM a marketing person? Frequently! Is a PM supposed to be technical? It depends! Is a PM supposed to customer-facing? Yes, but how much? Is a PM supposed to be a product’s CEO? Kind of, but not really. Is the PM supposed to be the founder of a product? Rarely. Is the PM responsible for strategy? Yes, to a degree. Is the PM supposed to be the product’s data analyst? Hopefully!

There are so many opinions about what a product manager does, we can’t satisfy everyone’s expectations. This is a challenge for product managers themselves. When I’ve had opportunity to manage or coach other product managers, I find myself reminding them to tell their teams what product managers are for.

Over time, when joining a product team, I’ve come down to this summary which I feel solves several problems at once. I think of this as the product manager’s identity:

A product manager is a member of the team with a different set of skills and daily activities. Those activities revolve around validation of a product’s direction, collecting data from a variety of sources, analysis of the feedback we get based on those sources, and constantly evaluating if the direction of the product is sound. That’s it.

I feel this solves a lot of problems at once because it clearly states what a product manager’s primary responsibilities are. Product validation is the domain of the product manager, nobody else is primarily responsible for this activity. While PMs collaborate with darn near everybody, being clear in this way makes it intuitive how the PM role fits with respect to other business functions:

Product managers don’t define how the product should be built. That’s what Engineers do. PMs don’t sell the product. That’s what Sales does. PMs don’t make hiring and firing decisions, that’s what managers do. PMs don’t do customer outreach and product branding, that’s what Marketing does. PMs don’t even tell the engineering team what to do - they mainly provide product direction in the form of feedback, in priority order. If they make a compelling argument, engineering will want to address those concerns first, but that’s not always the case. “Yes, we recognize that missing this widget means that we’re losing customers to the competitor. However, if we don’t rebuild CI this week, we’ll ship bad code,” is a perfectly reasonable argument (within reason) to set the PM’s direction aside.

Product Managers need to remind teams about their responsibilities frequently, Otherwise, there’s a never-ending torrent of work which will inevitably use up all of the product manager’s time. Teams have asked me to do an enormous variety of things. Without a strong sense of identity, I would be hard pressed to push back against. If I keep my function top of mind, I find that I am able to push back respectfully, and I’m often met with understanding. “Yes, I could fill out that pre-release compliance form. I agree that since it’s not code, it’s not an engineering task, and it could reasonably fall to me. However. This team has lots of engineers, and only one me. If I’m doing tasks like this, then I’m not spending time with potential customers, doing research, or testing our solution against competitors. Now, which would we prefer - that we maximize engineering velocity by offloading this form to me, or that we add compliance activities to the list of engineering tasks, and I work on ensuring that we’re producing a product with the best chance to succeed?”

This is the most optimistic, constructive way I have of reminding people what product managers are not without being defensive or combative. Rehearse this a few times. Can you see yourself saying this to your team? If they don’t respect this argument, do they understand what a product manager is really for? Do they value the role of a product manager?

One thing I know. Product managers are valued for their judgement - they collect data to make strong decisions, and those skills aren’t cheap. If a team really needs a release manager, or a project manager, hey, I’ll take product management-level pay to do that work, but don’t complain when the product misses the target.

I feel that the most universal skill that challenges product managers is time management. And in order to be good at that, we have to be very clear about what our priorities are - in the same way that engineers’ time is best spent writing code, and sales folks’ time is best spent in the field.
