Product Identity

What is a product? There are a lot of things that we could be doing which produce value. I learned this mantra from Pragmatic, “Choose a product. Not a technology, not a service. That people are willing to pay for now. That you can dominate in.”

Sometimes people say the product manager is the voice of the customer. I see it differently: the PM as the voice of the product. Customers would have you do whatever most conveniences them and enables them to achieve their goals more easily. Being customer-driven doesn’t mean we follow the whim of the customer.

Sometimes, product identity comes pretty easily. When I worked on databases, we were alongside the large-scale data analytics products. It was easy to see that while we were related, we didn’t solve the same problems. Most times, it’s really hard to say no, that’s not what we’re for.

I feel that, through the lens of the organization’s greater goals, and by constantly reevaluating your product’s direction via the activity of validation, the product manager forms a hypothesis of what the Product’s identity should be, in a way that best combines the organizational goals and provides customer value.

This was pretty abstract. Here’s a concrete example. I joined a hosting startup where the engineers had previously made a strategic bet on a challenger storage technology. They felt that the emphasis on low-latency performance best suited our product’s ability to serve high traffic websites. When I arrived, though, there was tension between our engineers and our vendor. I checked in with the vendor. Turns out, in those fast-moving times, the vendor had pivoted away from low-latency performance to better optimize sequential performance. While latency was a very crowded and competitive field, the vendor had found a niche as a tape-drive replacement solution. Thus, they had been evolving the identity of their product in a way that was different than what we needed. We started to investigate other storage solutions. Nobody was offended.

I use this lesson in customer meetings frequently, and it routinely wins me brownie points with potential customers and my partners in the field. Take two minutes out of the meeting, and try out a version of this little speech before you dive into your roadmap. I’m confident you’ll see a big difference in your conversations: “I know I’m here to do a roadmap review. And we will go through it together. But while I do, I want you to give me feedback. The roadmap is a flexible thing. I’m here to give you insight into our product direction. If that direction doesn’t align with your needs, please tell me about it! I can’t make any guarantees, but it’s my job to match your needs against our product’s identity. We should both understand if our directions align, or if we’re solving a different problem.”

If a customer tells you, “Honestly, I’m interested in low-latency performance, that’s our top priority,” you will win credibility if you say, “That doesn’t match our product’s identity. Our direction is tape drive replacement. If that’s of interest to you, let’s talk about where you have problems with tape drives. Otherwise, we can all save time and our sales team can go find people who need better sequential write performance.” Pretty often, this approach helps us realize that we’re talking to the wrong people - short-circuiting one meeting often means we’ll find out who the right people are more quickly. Ny being honest, you’ve accelerated your time to convert a customer.

Sidebar: Sure, immature sales teams may get grumpy, but challenge them to review this with their manager. “You may be right. Let’s review together with your area lead if Product Management is spoiling opportunities with customers who aren’t really interested in our product.” Remember, the sales team is one of your best sources of validation. If you’re blowing up their opportunities, it could be that they’re lousy at qualifying opportunities. In which case you can sit down and revise the qualification collateral together. Or, it could be that sales sees a different opportunity, which could be a key learning. If you take the time to better inform yourself of alternate paths to success, you may revise your product’s identity.

Often, the enemy of execution is poor focus. If a product manager’s primary responsibility is to identify what the most important thing is for the team to work on, then it’s also true that the product manager is responsible for declaring a ton of things as less important. I feel a product manager is at their best when they can articulate a strong argument for why we should not do something.

Developing a strong product identity will help you do that. When I have a strong sense of my product’s identity, I’ve been able to say, “Yes, this opportunity has value for this customer. Doing this will slow our progress on the thing we’ve identified as our best path to success. Further, it will complicate the product in such a way that confuses our target audience. For this reason, I am not denying that there isn’t value here, but this isn’t as important as succeeding in our vision.”
